Hello and welcome back to the course of machine learning you talked about hierarchical clustering and
how the algorithm works.
Also we talked about pentagrams and how they are constructed.
Today we're going to put the two together and learn how to get the maximum value out of our hierarchical
clustering algorithms.
So let's get straight into it.
All right.
So here we've got an example the example that we looked at previously where on the left we've got the
points in all scatterplot And then here on the right we've got the dental gram as which contains memory
of how the clusters were formed during the hierarchical clustering algorithm.
So here we can tell right away from First of all Peter and P3 are combined into a cluster then because
they're their height is the lowest the height of this bar is the lowest.
Then we look at the next lowest bar is this one.
So P5 and six the leads dissimilar out of the remaining.
And then these are pretty much the same height.
But we first perform Clusium we combine these into an Klosters so one was added to cluster P2P 3 then
P4 was added to cluster would be 5 five P-Six and then at the end all of the points combined to one
cluster.
So that's what the Democrat is telling us.
As you can see right away is giving us a lot of additional information on top of the scatterplot and
it contains that memory of the hierarchical clustering algorithm.
So how do we use this then diagram to understand how to best execute or get the most value out of the
H.C..
So let's have a look.
What we need to do with the Dinda Graham or what we can do is look at the horizontal levels and set
thresholds so we can set heights thresholds or distance actually distance thresholds are also called
dissimilarity thresholds because this vertical axis measures the median distance between points which
also represents the dissimilarity between them or points or clusters.
So what we can do is set a threshold for all dissimilarity and we can say that we don't want dissimilarity
to be greater than this level so again doesn't matter with the absolute value is.
It matters what the relative value is and how it looks on this image.
So we were setting the dissimilarity threshold we saying that anything if we come across clusters that
are above this threshold so we don't want within a cluster to have dissimilarity above this threshold
so what that will do is will give us two clusters.
Let's have a look at them there's our first cluster and there's our second cluster and that's that makes
sense so what that it's telling us is that within each one of these clusters the dissimilarity is always
less than three.
So let's say we've got some values here that say this is 1.5 this is 2.0.
So let's say we want to set the threshold at 1.7.
And what this is doing is it is not allowing any clusters that would have dissimilarity of greater than
1.7 within them.
And as you can see from the dental gram we can tell that all the everything below that level this cluster
and this cluster they don't have dissimilarity of 1.7 because the similarity is represented by these
vertical lines and that's how the customer thresholding works.
And the interesting part about pentagrams is you can quickly tell how many clusters you will have at
a certain threshold by just looking at how many vertical lines this horizontal threshold actually crosses
.
So here you can see it crosses one two vertical lines.
That means we will have two clusters will be this cluster of all these points.
Want to be three.
And this cluster P45 be.
All right so let's have a look at another example.
Let's have a look at a example where we put threshold at this level so somewhere just below where we
combined.
As you remember we had P5 P-Six and one Clauss appear to be three and one costs are pre-fall by itself
one by itself and then we combined the one with this cluster P4 with this cluster.
So let's say we're setting a threshold at just before that level of dissimilarity which allowed us to
combine P1 with this cluster and P4 with this cluster.
So what that will do is it'll give us a certain number of clusters so can you tell just by looking at
the demographic how many clusters will help.
Exactly correct.
We can have four clusters because it crosses forward lines 1 2 3 4.
Right so we're going to have a cluster one cluster of P2 and P3 cluster of before cluster of 5 and P-Six
as have a look for clusters.
And there they are.
So that is what we're going to get if we said that dissimilarity or distance threshold at that level
.
Let's try another one.
Let's say we want to set our dissimilarity threshold very low at point three meaning that we don't want
clusters that have any noise within them that have dissimilarity greater then this threshold.
So we're not going to allow any clusters like that.
And the interesting part here is that we're actually setting the threshold below our very first cluster
that we created or we here two and three so we're not even going to allow P2 and P3 to be combined.
I want to close are we going to say that dissimilarity level that distance between them is too great
too high we we don't think that based on our business knowledge or based on our other internal research
or external research that we don't think that any points with dissimilarity greater than this level
should be combined into a cluster.
It's just it just doesn't make sense from a from a finite Langner financial from a business perspective
from a perspective of knowledge about what this data set is about and what that will do is it will create
six plus hours because we cross six lines one two three four five six and then they are every single
point will be in its own cluster.
As you can see we've got six clusters so that is how a dented ramp works or how you can get value out
of a dental gram and you can set this threshold of different levels to understand how many clusters
you'll get just by looking at the DNA a Grammy can tell right away and you can that way find the optimal
level for the threshold of the optimal number of clusters that suits your project the best.
So but how do you find the actual not just an optimal number of classes that you think is optimal What
is the demographic giving us any ideas about the optimal number of clusters.
What can we tell from the dental gram that might be a good guide for us to select the optimal number
of clusters.
Well there's a great giveaway that the underground contains and that is the vertical distance because
it is measuring and dissimilarity.
So one of the standard approaches is just to look for the highest vertical distance that you can find
on the to.
So basically any line that will not cross any horizontal lines.
So for instance this line can be considered this like can be considered.
This line cannot be considered for that research because it crosses a hypothetical horizontal line so
you what you need to do is kind of like every horizontal line you have just imagined extends all the
way across to denigrate every single horizontal lung you have and now find the longest line among yours
among your existing vertical lines that doesn't cross any horizontal any of these extended horizontal
lines so for instance even this line cannot be considered for that purpose because it would hypothetically
cross this horizontal line that we have coming from this red line between P5 and P-Six.
Again this line can kind of be considered because it's crossing this line.
So you would need to look at this line for example or this line or if you wanted to use this line you
would need to use only a bit of it that part or this part.
So you can only use parts of lines that are between horizontal lines.
So out of all of the lines that you have here which is the longest that doesn't cross any extended horizontal
lines.
Well that's correct.
This one over here is the longest one or basically in our example the green and the red.
There are about the same height.
So this one or this one are the longest ones.
And so this is the largest distance and therefore the best or the recommended approach.
Again it's not a set in stone approach is a kind of one of the things that you could do is take a threshold
that will cross this largest distance across that large distance threshold and then use that threshold
to calculate the optimal number of clusters and actually find them.
So once we've crossed this largest distance with our threshold doesn't matter we said you can sit here
as head low or you can set high as long as it crosses this line then.
Now the two clusters are this one and this one as you can see that is considered to be one of the approaches
or this approach is telling us that the optimal number of clusters and these are them and kind of in
this case it makes sense.
You can see that indeed these points look that as if they're closer together.
And these points look as if they're closer together rather than getting any clusters in between them
or even breaking up into more clusters wouldn't make as much sense as this makes sense.
And so there we go.
That's that's one of the approaches you can use you can still look at this whole problem using similar
approach to k means where you use the elbow method so you could use something like that.
But in a hierarchical clustering we're going to focus on this approach with the largest distance.
And now let's quickly have a knowledge test.
So I'm going to have to charge here which are hidden on the left who have got the scatterplot on the
right.
You've got the to grab.
I'm going to show you only the DNA gram.
And I'd like you to try to understand or try to assess very quickly what's going on on the scatterplot
.
So for instance we'd like to know even afford seeing the scatterplot of the data set at the moment.
We'd like to know what is the optimal number of clusters in this data set just by looking at underground
.
Can you identify that.
So if you like you can post a video and just look at these vertical and horizontal lines and try to
find out based on the method that we discussed.
What would be the optimal number of clusters.
So in three to one I'm going to now reveal how I would solve this challenge.
Well what I would do is I'd look for the for the longest vertical line that doesn't cross an extended
horizontal lines.
If you extend that extend that extend that you can see that it's probably this line over here.
And so that's the largest distance.
That means we need to cross it with a horizontal line of our threshold and that will give us the number
of clusters which is three clusters because it crosses three lines here one two three.
And if you look at the chart as you can see indeed we do have three classes and it does look that bad
like that is the optimal number of clusters for this business problem.
So hopefully you enjoyed this tutorial.
We walk through all of this money so that you have a better intuitive understanding of how the hierarchical
clustering algorithm and pentagrams work.
And next how long will show you around in our in Python and together you will create some amazing analysis
around hierarchical clustering and together of him or you will solve a business problem using the hierarchical
clustering algorithm.
There's got some fun tutorials ahead of you and I look forward to seeing you next time.
Until then in machine learning.